<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Epigraph</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter">
		<section id="epigraph" epub:type="epigraph">
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>This is the night when I must die,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And great Orion walketh high</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In silent glory overhead:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He’ll set just after I am dead.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A week this night, I’m in my grave:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Orion walketh o’er the wave:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down in the dark damp earth I lie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While he doth march in majesty.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A few weeks hence and spring will come;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The earth will bright array put on</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of daisy and of primrose bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And everything which loves the light.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And someone to my child will say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“You’ll soon forget that you could play</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beethoven; let us hear a strain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From that slow movement once again.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And so she’ll play that melody,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While I among the worms do lie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dead to them all, forever dead;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The churchyard clay dense overhead.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I once did think there might be mine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One friendship perfect and divine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas! that dream dissolved in tears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before I’d counted twenty years.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For I was ever commonplace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of genius never had a trace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My thoughts the world have never fed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mere echoes of the book last read.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Those whom I knew I cannot blame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If they are cold, I am the same:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How could they ever show to me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More than a common courtesy?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There is no deed which I have done;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is no love which I have won,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make them for a moment grieve</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I this night their earth must leave.</span>
				</p>
				<hr/>
				<p>
					<span>Thus, moaning at the break of day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A man upon his deathbed lay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A moment more and all was still;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Morning Star came o’er the hill.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But when the dawn lay on his face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It kindled an immortal grace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if in death that Life were shown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which lives not in the great alone.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Orion sank down in the west</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just as he sank into his rest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I closed in solitude his eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And watched him till the sun’s uprise.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
